collective.watcherlist
======================

``collective.watcherlist`` is a package that enables you to keep a
list of people who want to receive emails when an item gets updated.
The main use case is something like Products.Poi_, which is an issue
tracker for Plone.  That product lets you create an issue tracker.  In
this tracker people can add issues.  The tracker has managers.
Everytime a new issue is posted, the managers should receive an email.
When a manager responds to an issue, the original poster (and the
other managers) should get an email.  Anyone interested in following
the issue, should be able to add themselves to the list of people who
get an email.  The functionality for this was in Poi, but has now been
factored out into this ``collective.watcherlist`` package.


Who should use this package?
----------------------------

This is not a package for end users.  Out of the box it does nothing.
It is a package for integrators or developers.  You need to write some
python and zcml in your own package (like Poi now does) to hook
``collective.watcherlist`` up in your code.

We gladly use the ZCA (Zope Component Architecture) to allow others to
register their own adapters and own email texts, so outside of Zope
the package does not make much sense.  And we import some code from
Plone too, so you will need that.  If you want to use it in bare Zope
or CMF, contact me: we can probably do some conditional imports
instead.

``collective.watcherlist`` might also be usable as a basis for a
newsletter product.  If you feel `Singing and Dancing`_ is overkill
for you, or too hard to adapt to your specific needs, you could try
writing some code around ``collective.watcherlist`` instead.


Basic integration steps
-----------------------

In its simplest form, the integration that is needed, is this:

- Register an adapter from your content type to
  ``collective.watcherlist.interfaces.IWatcherList``.  In a lot of
  cases using the default implementation as factory for this adapter
  is fine: ``collective.watcherlist.watchers.WatcherList``

- Create an html form where people can add themselves to the watcher
  list.  This could also be PloneFormGen_ form with a custom script
  adapter as action.

- Register a BrowserView for your content type, inheriting from
  ``collective.watcherlist.browser.BaseMail`` and override its
  properties ``subject``, ``plain`` and/or ``html``.

- Create an event handler or some other code that gets the adapter for
  your content type and uses that to send an email with the subject
  and contents defined in the browser view you created.


Sample integration
------------------

Let's give an example of what you need to do in your own code to use
this package.  We define a class that holds some info about a party::

  >>> class Party(object):
  ...     def __init__(self, reason):
  ...         self.reason = reason
  ...         self.invited = []

We tell the ZCA how to adapt a Party to a watcher list: how to turn it
into an object that holds a list of interested people and knows how to
send them an email.  Normally you would define an interface
``IParty``, say that the ``Party`` class implements it and use zcml to
register an adapter for that, something like this::

  <adapter
      for=".interfaces.IParty"
      factory="collective.watcherlist.watchers.WatcherList"
      />

Let's ignore the interface and use python (as that is a bit easier to
use in tests).  We will use the default implementation of a
watcherlist as provided by the package::

  >>> from zope.component import getGlobalSiteManager
  >>> from collective.watcherlist.watchers import WatcherList
  >>> sm = getGlobalSiteManager()
  >>> sm.registerAdapter(WatcherList, (Party, ))

.. This documentation doubles as automated test, so we run into a test
.. detail here: the WatcherList adapter stores the watchers in an
.. annotation, so we need to tell the ZCA how to do that; for standard
.. Plone/Archetypes content types this is already done, so you usually do
.. not need to care about this.  Oh, we can hide this, nice::
  :hide:

  >>> from zope.annotation.interfaces import IAnnotations
  >>> from zope.annotation.attribute import AttributeAnnotations
  >>> sm.registerAdapter(AttributeAnnotations, (Party, ), IAnnotations)

Now we create a Party and invite people::

  >>> birthday = Party("Maurits' birthday")
  >>> birthday.invited.append('Fred')
  >>> birthday.invited.append('Mirella')

We see if we can get a watcherlist for it::

  >>> from collective.watcherlist.interfaces import IWatcherList
  >>> watcherlist = IWatcherList(birthday)
  >>> watcherlist
  <collective.watcherlist.watchers.WatcherList object at ...>

We can ask several things of this list::

  >>> watcherlist.watchers
  []
  >>> watcherlist.send_emails
  True
  >>> watcherlist.addresses
  ()

We can add watchers.  These should be email addresses or (at least in
a Plone context) the ids of members in the site.  In your package you
would either create a button or other small form that people can use
to add themselves to the list, or create some code that automatically
adds some people, as Poi does for the creator of a new issue.  The
code is simple::

  >>> watcherlist.watchers.append('maurits@example.org')
  >>> watcherlist.watchers.append('reinout@example.org')
  >>> watcherlist.watchers
  ['maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org']
  >>> watcherlist.addresses
  ('maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org')

You can always switch off email sending.  This has the effect that no
addresses are reported::

  >>> watcherlist.send_emails = False
  >>> watcherlist.watchers
  ['maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org']
  >>> watcherlist.addresses
  ()

Undo that::

  >>> watcherlist.send_emails = True
  >>> watcherlist.watchers
  ['maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org']
  >>> watcherlist.addresses
  ('maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org')

Now we send an email.  We get the email text and subject simply from a
browser view that we define.  In the test this means we need to give
the Party a request object::

  >>> from zope.publisher.browser import TestRequest
  >>> birthday.REQUEST = TestRequest()

We now send an invitation email, but this fails::

  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')
  Traceback (most recent call last):
  ...
  ComponentLookupError...

This means we need to create a browser view with that name.  As the
basis we should take the base browser view defined in the
``collective.watcherlist`` package.  It contains three properties that
you would normally override: subject, plain and html::

  >>> from collective.watcherlist.browser import BaseMail
  >>> class PartyMail(BaseMail):
  ...     @property
  ...     def subject(self):
  ...         return self.context.reason
  ...     @property
  ...     def plain(self):
  ...         return "Invited are %s" % self.context.invited
  ...     @property
  ...     def html(self):
  ...         return "<p>%s</p>" % self.plain

You would normally register this with zcml, just like any other
browser view.  But here we do that in python code::

  >>> from zope.interface import Interface
  >>> sm.registerAdapter(PartyMail, (Party, TestRequest), Interface, 'invitation')

And we send the invitation again, in both plain text and html.  In
this test we have no proper mail host setup, so we simply print the
relevant info so we can see what would happen::

  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')
  Subject = Maurits' birthday
  Addresses = ('maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org')
  Message =
  From...
  Content-Type: multipart/alternative;...
  ...
  Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
  ...
  Invited are ['Fred', 'Mirella']
  ...
  Content-Type: text/html; charset="us-ascii"
  ...
  <p>Invited are ['Fred', 'Mirella']</p>
  ...

Let's skip the html and see if that simplifies the mail::

  >>> PartyMail.html = ''
  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')
  Subject = Maurits' birthday
  Addresses = ('maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org')
  Message =
  From...
  MIME-Version: 1.0
  Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
  Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
  <BLANKLINE>
  Invited are ['Fred', 'Mirella']

If there is neither plain text nor html, we do not send anything::

  >>> PartyMail.plain = ''
  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')

Let's add a bit of html again to see that only html goes fine too::

  >>> PartyMail.html = '<p>You are invited.</p>'
  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')
  Subject = Maurits' birthday
  Addresses = ('maurits@example.org', 'reinout@example.org')
  Message =
  From...
  MIME-Version: 1.0
  Content-Type: text/html; charset="us-ascii"
  Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
  <BLANKLINE>
  <p>You are invited.</p>

If we switch off email sending for this watcherlist... no emails are sent::

  >>> watcherlist.send_emails = False
  >>> watcherlist.send('invitation')

Reset that::

  >>> watcherlist.send_emails = True

Look at Products.Poi_ for some more examples of what you can do.

.. _Products.Poi: http://plone.org/products/poi
.. _`Singing and Dancing`: http://plone.org/products/dancing
.. _PloneFormGen: http://plone.org/products/ploneformgen
